# Elastic Stack

This repository contains the Elastic Stack configuration (Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana, Beats) as a starting point to learn the stack. 


## Setup

The [compose.yaml](./compose.yaml) file contains the configuration for Elasticsearch, Kibana, Logstash, and Beats services.
The configuration was inspired from the [official reference setup](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/deploy/self-managed/install-elasticsearch-docker-compose)
and a [setup tutorial](https://www.elastic.co/blog/getting-started-with-the-elastic-stack-and-docker-compose) and has been further adapted.

By default, the setup creates a single-node Elasticsearch cluster.
If this is your intention, then you only need the main `compose.yaml` file and you can forget about other Compose files.

In order to create a multi-node Elasticsearch cluster, you also need to use other Compose override files:
[compose.multi-node.yaml](./compose.multi-node.yaml) and [compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml](./compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml).
The second file (`compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml`) must only be used when first starting a new multi-node Elasticsearch cluster.
For subsequent restarts or normal operations, use only `compose.multi-node.yaml` without `compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml`.

Pull the Docker images for Elasticsearch, Kibana, Logstash, and Beats:
```bash
docker compose pull
```
(All images are defined in the main `compose.yaml` file.)

Make sure to set the environment variables (such as passwords and Kibana encryption keys) in the `.env` file. Use `.env.example` as a reference.


## Usage

For single-node setup, you can use standard Docker Compose commands to deploy the stack, e.g.:
```bash
# Start only Elasticsearch and Kibana
docker compose up es01 kibana
# Start all services
docker compose up
```

For multi-node setup, you need to specify the override Compose files with the `-f` option:
```bash
# When starting a new multi-node Elasticsearch cluster
docker compose -f compose.yaml -f compose.multi-node.yaml -f compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml up
# For further operations on a multi-node Elasticsearch cluster
docker compose -f compose.yaml -f compose.multi-node.yaml up
```

For convenience, you can also use a wrapper script [compose-cmd.sh](./compose-cmd.sh), specifying the mode:
```bash
./compose-cmd.sh up                      # Runs `docker compose -f compose.yaml up`
./compose-cmd.sh single up -d            # Runs `docker compose -f compose.yaml up -d`
./compose-cmd.sh multi config            # Runs `docker compose -f compose.yaml -f compose.multi-node.yaml config`
./compose-cmd.sh multi-bootstrap config  # Runs `docker compose -f compose.yaml -f compose.multi-node.yaml -f compose.multi-node.bootstrap.yaml config`
```
Note: Use `multi-bootstrap` only when creating a new multi-node Elasticsearch cluster. Once the cluster has formed, use `multi` instead.
You can also use [compose-cmd-strict.sh](./compose-cmd-strict.sh), which is a slightly stricter version of `compose-cmd.sh`
that checks existing Elasticsearch data volumes before allowing Compose startup commands with `multi` or `multi-bootstrap`.

Once the Elasticsearch service (e.g. `es01`) is running, copy the public CA certificate for verification:
```bash
docker compose cp es01:/usr/share/elasticsearch/config/certs/ca/ca.crt .
```

To query Elasticsearch, run:
```bash
curl --cacert ca.crt -u elastic:$ELASTIC_PASSWORD -XGET 'https://localhost:9200?pretty'
```
(Note that `es01` is the only node that exposes the HTTP API to the host.)

To save some typing, you can use `curl.py` and `curl.sh` wrapper scripts in the [utils](./utils/) directory, which predefine some `curl` arguments, e.g.:
```bash
./utils/curl.py GET 'https://localhost:9200/{index}/_search?pretty' '{"query": {"match": {"field": "value"}}}'
./utils/curl.py GET '/{index}/_search?pretty' '{"query": {"match": {"field": "value"}}}'
./utils/curl.sh -XPOST 'https://localhost:9200/_bulk?pretty' --data-binary @documents.ndjson
```
(You can also create a symlink in the repository root directory for easier invocation, e.g. `ln -s utils/curl.py curl.py`.)

To parse or highlight the output, you can use `jq` command-line JSON processor (e.g. `... | jq` or `... | jq -r '.hits.hits.[]._id'`).

If you want to remove the certificate warning when accessing Kibana via the browser, add the previously obtained CA certificate (`ca.crt`) to the trust store.
For example, in Firefox, you can go to **Settings > Privacy & Security** (or `about:preferences#privacy`), find the section **Certificates**, choose **Manage certificates > Authorities**, and import the certificate.
Alternatively, you can use the `certutil` tool, e.g.:
```bash
certutil -d ~/.mozilla/firefox/{your_profile}/ -A -i ca.crt -n "Elastic Certificate Tool Autogenerated CA" -t C,,
```
(See [this wiki page](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/User:Grawity/Adding_a_trusted_CA_certificate) for more information.)
